88 ‘THE HISTORY BOOK Le

therein no feeling of her wings, or any sensible resistance of
air to mount herself by.

SECT. VIII.

Of their opinion that seat paradise under the equinoctial : and of the
pleasant habitation under those climates.

THOSE which come nearer unto reason find paradise
under the equinoctial line, as Tertullian, Bonaventure, and
Durandus; judging, that thereunder might be found most
pleasure, and the greatest fertility of soil: but against it
"Thomas Aquinas objecteth the distemperate heat, which he
supposeth to be in all places so directly under the sun; but
this is non causa pro causa; for although paradise could
not be under the line, because Eden is far from it, in which
paradise was; and because there is no part of Euphrates,
‘Tigris, or Ganges under it, (Ganges being one of the four
rivers, as they suppose,) yet this conceit of distemper (being
but an old opinion) is found to be very untrue, though for
the conjecture not to be condemned, considering the age
when those fathers wrote, grounded chiefly on this: that
whereas it appeared, that every country, as it lay by de-
grees nearer the tropic, and so toward the equinoctial, did
so much the more exceed in heat; it was therefore a rea-
sonable conjecture, that those countries which were situated
directly under it, were of a distemper uninhabitable: but it
seemeth that Tertullian conceived better, and so did Avi-
cenne, for they both thought them habitable enough: and
though (perchance) in those days it might be thought a fan-
tastical opinion, (as all are which go against the vulgar)
yet we now find, that if there be any place upon the earth
of that nature, beauty, and delight, that paradise had, the
same must be found within that supposed uninhabitable
burnt zone, or within the tropics, and nearest to the line it-
self. For hereof experience hath informed reason, and time
hath made those things apparent which were hidden, and
could not by any contemplation be discovered. Indeed it
hath so pleased God to provide for all living creatures,

CHAP. I. OF THE WORLD. 89

wherewith he hath filled the world, that such inconveniences
which we contemplate afar off, are found by trial and the
witness of men’s travels to be so qualified, as there is no
portion of the earth made in vain, or as a fruitless lump to
fashion out the rest. For °God himself; saith Isaiah, that
JSormed the earth and made it; he that prepared it, he created
it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited. Now we find
that these hottest regions of the world seated under the
equinoctial line, or near it, are so refreshed with a daily
gale of easterly wind, (which the Spaniards call the Brize,)
that doth evermore blow strongest in the heat of the day, as
the downright beams of the sun cannot so much master it,
that there is any inconvenience or distemperate heat found
thereby. Secondly, the nights are so cold, fresh, and equal,
by reason of the entire interposition of the earth, as (for
those places which myself have seen, near the line and un-
der it) I know no other part of the world of better, or
equal temper; only there are some tracts, which by acci-
dent of high mountains are barred from this air and fresh
wind, and some few sandy parts without trees, which are
not therefore so well inhabited as the rest ; and such differ-
ence of soils we find also in all other parts of the world.
But (for the greatest part) those regions have so many goodly
rivers, fountains, and little brooks, abundance of high ce-
dars, and other stately trees casting shade, so many sorts of
delicate fruits, ever bearing, and at all times beautified with
blossom and fruit, both green and ripe, as it may of all
other parts be best compared to the paradise of Eden: the
boughs and branches are never unclothed and left naked;
their sap creepeth not under ground into the root, fearing
the injury of the frost; neither doth Pomona at any times
despise her withered husband Vertumnus, in his winter-
quarters and old age. Therefore are these countries called
terre vitiose, “ vicious countries:” for nature being li-
beral to all without labour, necessity imposing no industry
or travel, idleness bringeth forth no other fruits than vain

Isai. ale. 18.
