90 ‘THE HISTORY 00K I.

thoughts and licentious pleasures. So that to conclude this
part, Tertullian and those of his opinion were not deceived
in the nature of the place: but Aquinas, who misliked this
opinion, and followed a worse. And (to say the truth) all
the schoolmen were gross in this particular.

   

 

SECT. IX.

Of the change of the names of places : and that besides that Eden
in Calesyria, there is a country in Babylon, once of this name, as
is proved out of Isaiah xxvii. and Ezek. xxvii.

THESE opinions answered, and the region of Eden not,
found in any of those imaginary worlds, nor under forrida
zona; it followeth that now we discover and find out the
seat thereof, for in it was paradise by God planted. The
difficulty of which search resteth chiefly in this, that as all
nations have often changed names with their masters; so
are most of these places, by Moses remembered, forgotten.
by those names of all historians and geographers, as well an-
cient as modern.

Besides, we find that the Assyrians, Babylonians, Medes,
and Persians (Cyrus only and few others exeepted) sought to
extinguish the Hebrews. ‘The Grecians hated both their
nation and their religion; and the Romans despised once to
remember them in any of their stories. And as those three
monarchies succeeded each other, so did they transform the
names of all those principal places and cities in the east:
and after them, the Turk hath sought (what he could) to
extinguish in all things the ancient memory of those people,
which he hath subjected and enthralled.

‘Now besides those notable marks, Euphrates and Tigris,
the better to find the way which leadeth to the country of
Eden, we are to take for guides these two considerations, to
wit, that it lay eastward from Canaan and Judea; and that
it was of all others the most beautiful and fertile. First then
in respect of situation, the next country to Judea eastward
was Arabia Petrea; but in this region was Moses himself
when he wrote: and the next unto it eastward also was
Arabia the Desert, both which, in respect of the infertility,

 
